0.74 Blog Post (#6)
microsoft/react-native-devblog: blogposts/2024-05-15-improved-gallery-fabric-0.74.md

---

> post_title: "Improved Gallery, Road to Fabric, RNW 0.74"

Reviewer: maybe a more engaging title? At the moment it feels a bit like a list

author1: tatianakapos

> post_slug: 2024-05-15-improved-gallery-fabric-0.74

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
post_slug: 2024-05-24-improved-gallery-fabric-0.74
```

Aim for Friday?

> post_date: 2024-05-15 12:00:00

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
post_date: 2024-05-24 12:00:00
```

> categories: react-native // don't change the category

Reviewer: ```suggestion
categories: react-native
```

nit: I think to make it al work properly, we need to remove that comment

tags: react-native, react-native-windows, releases
summary: We've recently release React Native 0.74! Alongside all the fantastic features from React Native, we've been hard at work enhancing the Windows experience, refreshing our Gallery App, and setting the stage for Fabric support.
---

> Embark on an exciting journey with our revamped Gallery app, now aligned with the WinUI3 gallery to showcase a modern RNW application. We've spruced up multiple accessibility features and expanded example matrix. Plus, get a sneak peek at Fabric, our latest rendering system for React Native, designed for efficiency in C++. And guess what? React Native Windows 0.74 is now live, bringing you exciting updates, from empowered view managers to streamlined template support and enhanced Pressable component functionality. Explore these changes and more, and don't forget to follow us on Twitter @ReactNativeMSFT for the latest news and updates! 

Reviewer: I think this intro paragraph could be make a bit shorter, and remove that last phrase. There's a callout to the twitter account at the end anyway.

What I would suggest is to make it a bit more "interest-catching" for the reader. Why should they read the rest of the article? Who are we targetting with it?

# ✨ Improved Gallery App

> We've been hard at work revitalizing our Gallery app, aligning it with the [WinUI3 gallery](https://www.microsoft.com/store/productId/9P3JFPWWDZRC?ocid=pdpshare) to showcase a more sleek and modern RNW application. In addition, we've elevated the accessibility features and broadened our array of examples to encompass clipboard functionality, straightforward fetch/post operations, as well as demonstrations of radio buttons and linear gradients.

Reviewer 3: > we've elevated the accessibility features

Wording doesn't quite land for me. Maybe something like "we've ensured it meets inclusive and accessible design requirements"?

We didn't really enhance anything. We just made sure it made the bar met by our compliance teams and tools.

> We've been hard at work revitalizing our Gallery app, aligning it with the [WinUI3 gallery](https://www.microsoft.com/store/productId/9P3JFPWWDZRC?ocid=pdpshare) to showcase a more sleek and modern RNW application. In addition, we've elevated the accessibility features and broadened our array of examples to encompass clipboard functionality, straightforward fetch/post operations, as well as demonstrations of radio buttons and linear gradients.

Reviewer 3: > broadened our array of examples to encompass clipboard functionality, straightforward fetch/post operations, as well as demonstrations of radio buttons and linear gradient

I don't know if I want to call out the specific list of modules. Partially because this details aren't all that exciting. But also because I think we might squeeze in a couple more over the coming weeks. Yajur has a react-native-winrt one in PR he might land. And I've been trying to get the community contribution of a lottie example landed. So having some vague language here leaves room for us to grow it. But I'm not positive what resonates for folks.

Alternative: "broadened the array of examples to encompass more community modules and common scenarios"

> Get React Native Gallery from the [Microsoft store]((https://www.microsoft.com/store/productId/9NPG0B292H4R?ocid=pdpshare)) or get the latest changes from our (Github repository)[https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-gallery]!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Get React Native Gallery from the [Microsoft store](https://www.microsoft.com/store/productId/9NPG0B292H4R?ocid=pdpshare) or get the latest changes from our (Github repository)[https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-gallery]!
```

> ![rn-gallery-gif-2024](D:\react-native-devblog\blogposts\assets\gallery-demo-2024.gif)

Reviewer 3: Looks like a local url. I want to see the GIF! :D

# 🗺️ Roadmap to Fabric

> Introducing [Fabric](https://reactnative.dev/architecture/fabric-renderer), the latest rendering system for React Native. Designed for efficiency across platforms in C++, RNW Fabric seamlessly targets Composition while allowing hosting XAML islands within. Fabric-powered apps default to Win32 architecture, aligning with WinAppSDK and WinUI3 standards. Stay tuned for migration guidance for current UWP RNW apps. Follow our journey to Fabric [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042).

Reviewer 3: In general I try to avoid the "RNW" acronym for external audiences, since that's a shorthand that's less accessible. So maybe more like "React Native for Windows' new Fabric renderer seamlessly targets Windows Composition (link)..."

Maybe also "XAML islands" needs a link to whatever's in the WinAppSDK docs?

Reviewer 3: > Fabric-powered apps default to Win32 architecture, aligning with WinAppSDK and WinUI3 standard

Bringing up WinAppSDK and WinUI3 should come with links, since they not be well know terms.

Instead of saying Win32 I wonder if we should just say WinAppSDK, which implies Win32, and shows how we're betting on the same core platform as WinUI3.

> Introducing [Fabric](https://reactnative.dev/architecture/fabric-renderer), the latest rendering system for React Native. Designed for efficiency across platforms in C++, RNW Fabric seamlessly targets Composition while allowing hosting XAML islands within. Fabric-powered apps default to Win32 architecture, aligning with WinAppSDK and WinUI3 standards. Stay tuned for migration guidance for current UWP RNW apps. Follow our journey to Fabric [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042).

Reviewer: a nit, but I think it's worth calling out: we're not really introducing Fabric. Fabric has been introduced by Meta in React Native for a while - what we are introducing is Fabric/new architecture support in RNWindows. Also, might be worth clarifying if we're only adding Fabric support, or Fabric+TurboModules+Codegen+Bridgeless.

Author: @chrisglein or @stmoy, what is the right story here? I know that we are supporting Fabric but are we including TurboModules/Codegen/Bridgeless?

Reviewer 2: Might be worthwhile to pull in Andrew. My understanding is that we're doing all of those things (ie. our initial impl. of Native Modules was built to be compatible with TurboModules, we've got Codegen working, we're on the way to bridgeless) but I think Andrew would probably be able to help. 

For Lorenzo's feedback about "introducing fabric" -- +1 to his suggestion to say "... for Windows"

Maybe: "React Native Windows now supports the new architecture, including Fabric, <and the rest>"

> *I think it would be super slay to have a demo of an app here. Some choices include Gallery on Fabric (hopefully updated to Chris's latest changes), Playground RNTester, ChatAI App*

Author: Anyone have a preference on what Fabric app we showcase?

Reviewer 3: Depends on if it's a link to a live app or a recorded demo.
For live app...
Fabric Gallery won't be ready in time.
RNTester isn't designed for non-contributors.
Artificial Chat isn't public in the store... but I'm working on that. Just don't know if I can get to it in next couple weeks.

If we just want to put a GIF of some apps on Fabric vs. Paper, that's doable. I've done that with the chat app. Could do with that or gallery.

Author: My vote would be a quick gif of Gallery since it would should what components we currently have supported (but I would love if it had your changes to the updated Gallery, it wouldn't look as nice to have Fabric on the older version for comparison)

If not that, then I think having a GIF of your chat app would be cool to show a current working app on Fabric!

## Increasing Core Functionality

> We have been hard at work getting component parity up to speed with the older Paper rendering system. Several components, including Views, TextInput, and ActivityIndicator, already support a large set of properties and methods, with more components in the work. Here's a current snapshot of our progress:

Reviewer: int: Paper is mostly a term used by folks working on RN itself, most folks need the "clarification" that it's the old arch
```suggestion
We have been hard at work getting component parity up to speed with the old architecture (Paper) rendering system. Several components, including Views, TextInput, and ActivityIndicator, already support a large set of properties and methods, with more components in the work. Here's a current snapshot of our progress:
```

| Priority | Component | Available | Properties |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | 
| 0 | View| ✅ | 90% | 
| 0 | Text| ✅ | 85% | 
| 0 | Image| ✅ | 89% | 
| 0 | TextInput| ✅ | 80% | 
| 1 | ScrollView| ✅ | 84% | 
| 1 | Modal| 🟥 | 64% | 
| 2 | ActivityIndicator| ✅ | 86% | 
| 2 | Switch| ✅ | 90% | 

> | 2 | RefreshControl| 🟥 | 28% | 

Reviewer 3: This has been great detail for our more inner circle partners. What's the right detail for the blog audience? I like highlighting that we have components working and most with 80-90% of parity with RNW Paper. But I'm not sure on right way to express that.

> *As of February 2024*

Reviewer 3: We'll want a more up to date snapshot.
I know I need to update the one on the pinned issue, but Jon changed the reporting system so we need to reevaluate.

## Getting Community Modules Onboard

> *Do we have a plan for this?*

Reviewer 3: We won't in the timeline for this blog post. That'd be more of a "what to look for in the months to come".

## Current Timeline

*Copied mostly from the Github issue, need to know what the current expected timeline is*

> At this time, Fabric on Windows isn't quite ready for widespread adoption. While we're actively working to enhance both functionality and the developer experience, there are still significant gaps to address. If you're an early adopter who doesn't mind diving into an evolving landscape, you can explore Fabric [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/wiki/Using-the-new-architecture-templates). Keep in mind that documentation may be limited, and we recommend reviewing the provided lists of yet-to-be-implemented features before submitting any bug reports. Rest assured, as we continue our journey, support for Fabric will steadily expand.

Reviewer 3: We can save the call to action (or warning 😅) for a future blog post. For now we want to inform the broad strategy. People can click through to the pinned issue if they want more.

# 🎉 React Native Windows 0.74 Release Now Available! 🎉

> We're thrilled to announce the release of React Native Windows version 0.74, freshly rolled out on 4/29/2024! Alongside the enhancements brought by React Native 0.74, we've been hard at work implementing some exciting Windows-specific updates.

Reviewer 3: I feel like the 0.74 release should be first in the article.
1. 0.74 release
2. Improved gallery app
3. Roadmap

### React Native Windows Upgraded to C++20  

With React Native Windows now adopting the latest C++20 standard, we're bringing our codebase up to speed with modern development practices. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12656)

### Enable custom timer factory implementation 

Introducing `Microsoft.ReactNative.ReactCoreInjection.SetTimerFactory`, a game-changer for custom timer implementations in React Native for Windows. Ideal for environments lacking a `Microsoft.UI.Dispatching.DispatcherQueue`, this feature ensures seamless operation, even under diverse circumstances. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12856)

### Enhanced Pressable Component with Disabled Property Support

In response to community feedback, we've bolstered the Pressable component's functionality. This update introduces native support for the `disabled` property, while also ensuring that the onKeyDown event handler behaves appropriately when the component is disabled. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12799)

## Deprecations

### Direct Debugging as the Default

> To streamline our debugging process, we're transitioning away from web debugging to align with core practices. For all engines except Hermes, we recommend utilizing direct debugging. While Hermes currently experiences challenges with direct debugging, rest assured, we're actively working on a solution for an upcoming patch release. Check for updates surrounding Hermes [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12982)

Reviewer 3: As with the pinned issue, link to the RN core discussion thread on this, since we're matching their decision.

Reviewer: +1, I would make it clear that we are aligned/aligning with upstream

### CoreApp APIs and prototypes

> CoreApp was created as a testing ground to explore potential directions for Fabric. However, as we pivoted towards a different trajectory, we've made the decision to deprecate these APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CoreApp was created as a testing ground to explore potential directions for Fabric. We've taken what we've learned as influence on the Fabric app templates and we've made the decision to deprecate the CoreApp option for Paper apps.
```

> ## How can I upgrade my App to get all this good stuff??

Reviewer: maybe a notch too informal? Doesn't seem to match the tone of the rest of the blogpost

> The best way to upgrade to the latest **0.74** release is to follow our [upgrade documentation](https://microsoft.github.io/react-native-windows/docs/upgrade-app) where you can either upgrade with CLI commands or manually update your application using the Upgrade Helper. 

Reviewer: add link to upgrade-helper

To get the full list of release details, including breaking changes, check out our [release notes over on our repo.](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/releases/tag/react-native-windows_v0.74.0)

---

> If you’re interested in getting started with React Native for Windows, check out our website at [aka.ms/reactnative](https://aka.ms/reactnative).

Reviewer: nit: I'd put the actual website, not the redirect link

---

> post_title: "RNW 0.74 Launches: From Gallery Enhancements to Fabric Exploration!"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
post_title: "RNW 0.74 Launches: A Gallery Glow-up and Fabric Foundations!"
```

Maybe a little corny, but I'm reacting to "Fabric Exploration" since that makes it sound like it's just a research project.

Author: I love the change to Glow-up!

author1: tatianakapos
post_slug: 2024-05-15-improved-gallery-fabric-0.74
post_date: 2024-05-15 12:00:00
categories: react-native
tags: react-native, react-native-windows, releases

> summary: We've recently release React Native 0.74! Alongside all the fantastic features from React Native, we've been hard at work enhancing the Windows experience, refreshing our Gallery App, and setting the stage for Fabric support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
summary: We've recently released React Native 0.74! Alongside all the fantastic features from React Native, we've been hard at work enhancing the Windows experience, refreshing our Gallery App, and setting the stage for Fabric support.
```

---

> React Native Windows 0.74 is now live, introducing a host of enhancements, from empowered view managers to streamlined template support, learn how you can support more complex React Native Window Applications! Step into the future with our revamped Gallery app, aligned with the WinUI3 gallery for a cutting-edge RNW experience with an expanded example matrix. Plus, get an exclusive peek at Fabric, our latest rendering system for React Native, designed for optimal efficiency in C++. Explore these changes and more!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
React Native Windows 0.74 is now live, introducing a host of enhancements ranging from empowered view managers to streamlined template support so you can learn how to support more complex React Native Windows applications! Step into the future with our revamped Gallery app, aligned with the [WinUI Gallery](https://aka.ms/winuigallery) for a cutting-edge RNW experience with even more examples. Plus, get an exclusive peek at Fabric, our latest rendering system for React Native, designed for optimal efficiency in C++. Explore these changes and more!
```

# 🎉 React Native Windows 0.74 Release Now Available! 🎉

> We're thrilled to announce the release of React Native Windows version 0.74, freshly rolled out on 4/29/2024! Alongside the enhancements brought by [React Native 0.74](https://reactnative.dev/blog/2024/04/22/release-0.74), we've been hard at work implementing some exciting Windows-specific updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're thrilled to announce the release of [React Native Windows version 0.74](https://linkToTheReleaseNotes), freshly rolled out on 4/29/2024! Alongside the enhancements brought by [React Native 0.74](https://reactnative.dev/blog/2024/04/22/release-0.74), we've been hard at work implementing some exciting Windows-specific updates.
```

## New Features

### View Managers Empowered to Capture Pointers 🖱️ https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/8969

> Now, view managers can control of the pointer with the new 'AllowUncaptured' flag. This feature enables continued receipt of events, such as PointerMoved, even after the initial press. Say hello to more sophisticated interactions, like dragging elements beyond their conventional boundaries. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/8969)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
View managers can now control the pointer with the new 'AllowUncaptured' flag. This feature enables continued receipt of events, such as `PointerMoved`, even after the initial press. Say hello to more sophisticated interactions, like dragging elements beyond their conventional boundaries. [To learn more about how you can use `AllowUncaptured, click here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/8969)
```

### React Native Windows Upgraded to C++20  

With React Native Windows now adopting the latest C++20 standard, we're bringing our codebase up to speed with modern development practices. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12656)

### Enable custom timer factory implementation 

Introducing `Microsoft.ReactNative.ReactCoreInjection.SetTimerFactory`, a game-changer for custom timer implementations in React Native for Windows. Ideal for environments lacking a `Microsoft.UI.Dispatching.DispatcherQueue`, this feature ensures seamless operation, even under diverse circumstances. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12856)

### Enhanced Pressable Component with Disabled Property Support

In response to community feedback, we've bolstered the Pressable component's functionality. This update introduces native support for the `disabled` property, while also ensuring that the onKeyDown event handler behaves appropriately when the component is disabled. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12799)

## Deprecations

### Direct Debugging as the Default

> To streamline our debugging process, we're shifting our focus from web debugging to align with React Native's decision to [deprecate web debugging](https://github.com/react-native-community/discussions-and-proposals/discussions/734). For all engines except Hermes, we recommend utilizing direct debugging. While Hermes currently experiences challenges with direct debugging, rest assured, we're actively working on a solution for an upcoming patch release. Check for updates surrounding Hermes [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12982)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To streamline our debugging process, we're shifting our focus from web debugging to align with React Native's direction to [deprecate web debugging](https://github.com/react-native-community/discussions-and-proposals/discussions/734). For all engines except Hermes, we recommend utilizing direct debugging. While Hermes currently experiences challenges with direct debugging, we're actively working on a solution for an upcoming patch release. Check for updates surrounding Hermes [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12982).
```

### CoreApp APIs and prototypes

> CoreApp was created as a testing ground to explore potential directions for Fabric. We've taken what we've learned as influence on the Fabric app templates and we've made the decision to deprecate the CoreApp option for Paper apps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CoreApp was created as a testing ground to explore potential directions for Fabric. We've taken these learnings back into the main Fabric app templates, and have therefore deprecated the CoreApp option for Paper apps. 
```

## Reliability Boost

> While perhaps less flashy, another crucial aspect of 0.74 is our commitment to enhancing the reliability and trustworthiness of React Native Windows. In this release, we've tackled numerous bugs, ranging from resolving [ScrollView's momentum scroll](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/commit/1367b74599cc888082d280d728b1ac02917cea96) issues and [preventing memory leaks from HTTP responses](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/commit/ea58fe084c5d8a9116c69807ca9473aaa9e54221) to addressing [UIScheduler deadlocking during shutdown](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/commit/e2bf3e27f1ad328bcc74d00083482ed5d74a4af6).

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should be a bullet list?

Author: I thought about that too! The only reason I didn't is because we had a lot more reliability bugs fixed than just these three but are a little too small to mention in the blog post. I thought this conveyed the sentiment while a bulleted list makes it seems like we only fixed three issues.

If you encounter any bugs in 0.74, please help us out by filing an issue on our [repository](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues)!

> ## What's the best way to upgrade my App?

Reviewer 2: Love this section. Maybe we could pull it up to the top?

The best way to upgrade to the latest **0.74** release is to follow our [upgrade documentation](https://microsoft.github.io/react-native-windows/docs/upgrade-app) where you can either upgrade with CLI commands or manually update your application using the [Upgrade Helper](https://react-native-community.github.io/upgrade-helper/). 

> To get the full list of release details, including breaking changes, check out our [release notes over on our repo.](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/releases/tag/react-native-windows_v0.74.0)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get the full list of release details, including breaking changes, check out our [release notes over on our repo](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/releases/tag/react-native-windows_v0.74.0).
```

> # ✨ Improved Gallery App

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# ✨ Improved [React Native Gallery](https://www.microsoft.com/store/productId/9NPG0B292H4R?ocid=pdpshare) App
```

Is it

> We've been hard at work revitalizing our Gallery app, aligning it with the [WinUI3 gallery](https://www.microsoft.com/store/productId/9P3JFPWWDZRC?ocid=pdpshare) to showcase a more sleek and modern RNW application. In addition, we've ensured it meets inclusive and accessible design requirements and broadened the array of examples to encompass more community modules and common scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've been hard at work revitalizing our Gallery app, aligning it with the [WinUI Gallery](https://aka.ms/winuiGallery) to showcase a more sleek and modern RNW application. In addition, we've ensured it meets inclusive and accessible design requirements and broadened the array of examples to encompass more community modules and common scenarios.
```

*I think it would be super slay to have a demo of an app here. Some choices include Gallery on Fabric (hopefully updated to Chris's latest changes), Playground RNTester, ChatAI App*

## Increasing Core Functionality

We have been hard at work getting component parity up to speed with the old architecture's (*commonly referred to as Paper*) rendering system, ensuring a seamless transition for users migrating to Fabric in the future. Several components, including Views, TextInput, and ActivityIndicator, already support a large set of properties and methods, with more components in the work. Here's a current snapshot of our progress:

| Priority | Component | Available | Properties |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | 
| 0 | View| ✅ | 90% | 
| 0 | Text| ✅ | 85% | 
| 0 | Image| ✅ | 89% | 
| 0 | TextInput| ✅ | 80% | 
| 1 | ScrollView| ✅ | 84% | 
| 1 | Modal| 🟥 | 64% | 
| 2 | ActivityIndicator| ✅ | 86% | 
| 2 | Switch| ✅ | 90% | 
| 2 | RefreshControl| 🟥 | 28% | 

> *As of February 2024*

Author: Adding back Chris's feedback to address later "This has been great detail for our more inner circle partners. What's the right detail for the blog audience? I like highlighting that we have components working and most with 80-90% of parity with RNW Paper. But I'm not sure on right way to express that.

We'll want a more up to date snapshot.
I know I need to update the one on the pinned issue, but Jon changed the reporting system so we need to reevaluate."

Author: Went though the old issues and updated these to April! I changed RefreshControl and Modal to 0% but it doesn't make a lot of sense as a reader to see that these control aren't implemented but they have properties.

## What Lies Ahead

> We're currently striving to achieve component parity with the old architecture, ensuring each component has well-rounded functionality and implementing Modal and RefreshControl. Additionally, our efforts extend to migrating community modules to Fabric and exploring the integration of XAML components within a Fabric app.

Reviewer 2: > migrating community modules

It might be premature, but I wonder if we should discuss which ones we're thinking about... @chrisglein thoughts?

Reviewer 3: Let's not broach that quite yet.

Reviewer 4: I think if we are promoting that it is possible to look at /play with RNW fabric, we should probably directly callout that it is not currently possible to host XAML controls - since that is a pretty big gap.  The way its currently laid out the fact that XAML components dont work is kind of hidden in the fact that we are working on it.    I think we should be more up front with people - if they want to try it today, their custom components wont work without work. -- And you cannot host XAML controls at all.  And basically no community modules support RNW fabric yet.

That should correctly set expectations for trying fabric today.  Otherwise we'll get flooded by people trying fabric and filing issues about things we know do not work.

Reviewer 3: > Added a section below to address the current gaps (XAML. Community Modules, custom components)! Let me know if that's good enough to set expectations for Fabric or if we need to emphasize them more.

Actually, the combination of that section and the preexisting one that followed it reads as maybe _too_ strong of a stop sign. Maybe instead just an added sentence instead of a new paragraph?

Author: I can see the heavy stop sign for sure! expanded the following paragraph to just add a sentence of the current big limitations

At this time, Fabric on Windows isn't quite ready for widespread adoption. While we're actively working to enhance both functionality and the developer experience, there are still significant gaps to address.  Keep in mind that documentation may be limited, and we recommend reviewing the provided lists of yet-to-be-implemented features before submitting any bug reports. Rest assured, as we continue our journey, support for Fabric will steadily expand which you can follow [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042)!

---

If you’re interested in getting started with React Native for Windows, check out our website at [aka.ms/reactnative](https://microsoft.github.io/react-native-windows/).

> You can also follow us on Twitter [@ReactNativeMSFT](https://twitter.com/reactnativemsft) to keep up to date on news, feature roadmaps, and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also follow us on X [@ReactNativeMSFT](https://twitter.com/reactnativemsft) to keep up to date on news, feature roadmaps, and more.
```

This makes me sad, but we should probably call it X...

## Increasing Core Functionality

We have been hard at work getting component parity up to speed with the old architecture's (*commonly referred to as Paper*) rendering system, ensuring a seamless transition for users migrating to Fabric in the future. Several components, including Views, TextInput, and ActivityIndicator, already support a large set of properties and methods, with more components in the work. Here's a current snapshot of our progress:

| Component | Available | Properties/Methods |
| --- | --- | --- | 
| View| ✅ | 93% | 
| Text| ✅ | 89% | 
| Image| ✅ | 91% | 
| TextInput| ✅ | 82% | 
| ScrollView| ✅ | 86% | 
| ActivityIndicator| ✅ | 89% | 
| Switch| ✅ | 92% | 
| RefreshControl| 🟥 | 0% | 
| Modal| 🟥 | 0% | 
As of April 2024. More detail on the repo [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042).

## What Lies Ahead

We're currently striving to achieve component parity with the old architecture, ensuring each component has well-rounded functionality and implementing Modal and RefreshControl. Additionally, our efforts extend to migrating community modules to Fabric and exploring the integration of XAML components within a Fabric app.
 

> It is important to note that hosting XAML controls is not currently possible in the RNW Fabric, which represents a significant gap. Additionally, community modules do not support RNW Fabric yet, and custom components won't work without additional effort. We are aware of these issues and are actively working to implement solutions soon.

Author: went with the alternative route of expanding the below paragraph!

> At this time, Fabric on Windows isn't quite ready for widespread adoption. While we're actively working to enhance both functionality and the developer experience, there are still significant gaps to address.  Keep in mind that documentation may be limited, and we recommend reviewing the provided lists of yet-to-be-implemented features before submitting any bug reports. Rest assured, as we continue our journey, support for Fabric will steadily expand which you can follow [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042)!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At this time, Fabric on Windows isn't quite ready for widespread adoption. While we're actively working to enhance both functionality and the developer experience, there are still significant gaps to address. For example, public community modules do not yet support RNW Fabric, and custom components won't work without additional effort. At this stage documentation may be limited, and we recommend reviewing the provided lists of yet-to-be-implemented features before submitting any bug reports. Rest assured, as we continue our journey, support for Fabric will steadily expand which you can follow [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042)!
```
Alternate option of just expanding this paragraph a smidge.

## New Features

### View Managers Empowered to Capture Pointers 🖱️ https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/8969

View managers can now control the pointer with the new 'AllowUncaptured' flag. This feature enables continued receipt of events, such as `PointerMoved`, even after the initial press. Say hello to more sophisticated interactions, like dragging elements beyond their conventional boundaries. [To learn more about how you can use `AllowUncaptured, click here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/8969)

### Streamlined C++ Template Support for create-react-native-library 

Introducing a fresh template, seamlessly integrating with the 'npx create-react-native-library' command. Say goodbye to complexities; now adding Windows support for turbo modules is a breeze. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12481)

### React Native Windows Upgraded to C++20  

With React Native Windows now adopting the latest C++20 standard, we're bringing our codebase up to speed with modern development practices. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12656)

> ### Enable custom timer factory implementation 

Reviewer 4: We probably shouldn't call out the custom timer stuff.  One its for fabric use only.  Two its for some pretty rare use cases.

Introducing `Microsoft.ReactNative.ReactCoreInjection.SetTimerFactory`, a game-changer for custom timer implementations in React Native for Windows. Ideal for environments lacking a `Microsoft.UI.Dispatching.DispatcherQueue`, this feature ensures seamless operation, even under diverse circumstances. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12856)

### Enhanced Pressable Component with Disabled Property Support

In response to community feedback, we've bolstered the Pressable component's functionality. This update introduces native support for the `disabled` property, while also ensuring that the onKeyDown event handler behaves appropriately when the component is disabled. [Learn more...](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/pull/12799)

## Deprecations

### Direct Debugging as the Default

> To streamline our debugging process, we're shifting our focus from web debugging to align with React Native's direction to [deprecate web debugging](https://github.com/react-native-community/discussions-and-proposals/discussions/734). For all engines except Hermes, we recommend utilizing direct debugging. While Hermes currently experiences challenges with direct debugging, we're actively working on a solution for an upcoming patch release. Check for updates surrounding Hermes [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12982).

Reviewer 3: Timeline-wise... will we have the debugging issue resolved with 0.74.x and can downgrade this warning?

Reviewer 4: Yup, this is fixed in the latest 0.74 releases. - lets remove this section.

Get React Native Gallery from the [Microsoft store](https://www.microsoft.com/store/productId/9NPG0B292H4R?ocid=pdpshare) or get the latest changes from our (Github repository)[https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-gallery]!

![rn-gallery-gif-2024](assets/gallery-demo-2024.gif)

# 🗺️ Roadmap to Fabric

We've committed ourselves to adding Windows support for React Native's [Fabric](https://reactnative.dev/architecture/fabric-renderer) architecture, the latest rendering system for React Native. Designed for efficiency across platforms in C++, React Native for Windows Fabric seamlessly targets Composition while allowing hosting XAML islands within. Fabric-powered apps default to [WinAppSDK](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/apps/windows-app-sdk/) architecture, aligning with modern [WinUI3 standards](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/apps/winui/winui3/). Stay tuned for migration guidance for current UWP RNW apps. Follow our journey to Fabric [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042).

> While our migration efforts to Fabric are underway, our applications aren't quite ready for publication just yet. But fear not! We're thrilled to offer you a sneak peek at a functional app in both Paper and Fabric versions. Please bear in mind that Fabric may exhibit some visual disparities that we are working to iron out.

Reviewer 3: > our applications aren't quite ready for publication just yet

Something about this feels not exactly phrased right. The platform isn't ready for production apps. When we say "our applications" here... which applications does that refer to? Bit of stumbling point for me, but minor.

Author: fixed!

> While our migration efforts to Fabric are underway, our applications aren't quite ready for publication just yet. But fear not! We're thrilled to offer you a sneak peek at a functional app in both Paper and Fabric versions. Please bear in mind that Fabric may exhibit some visual disparities that we are working to iron out.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While our migration efforts to Fabric are underway, our applications aren't quite ready for publication just yet. But fear not! We're thrilled to offer you a sneak peek at a functional app in both Paper and Fabric versions. Please bear in mind that Fabric may exhibit some visual disparities that we are working to iron out (keep an eye on that [road map]([here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042)!).
```

> ![chat-ai-paper-gif-2024](assets/2024-05-15-improved-gallery-fabric-0.74/chat-ai-paper.gif)
> 
> ![chat-ai-fabric-gif-2024](assets/2024-05-15-improved-gallery-fabric-0.74/chat-ai-fabric.gif)

Reviewer 3: Can these be side by side in a table with headers? Like this... probably:

```suggestion
| App on Paper | App on Fabric |
| --- | --- |
| ![chat-ai-paper-gif-2024](assets/2024-05-15-improved-gallery-fabric-0.74/chat-ai-paper.gif) | ![chat-ai-fabric-gif-2024](assets/2024-05-15-improved-gallery-fabric-0.74/chat-ai-fabric.gif) |
```

Reviewer 4: +1 - It wasn't clear to me what I'm looking at.  Also, is this the latest version of this we have -- I'm a little surprised by the number of differences still?

## Increasing Core Functionality

We have been hard at work getting component parity up to speed with the old architecture's (*commonly referred to as Paper*) rendering system, ensuring a seamless transition for users migrating to Fabric in the future. Several components, including Views, TextInput, and ActivityIndicator, already support a large set of properties and methods, with more components in the work. Here's a current snapshot of our progress:

> | Priority | Component | Available | Properties/Methods |
> | --- | --- | --- | --- | 
> | 0 | View| ✅ | 93% | 
> | 0 | Text| ✅ | 89% | 
> | 0 | Image| ✅ | 91% | 
> | 0 | TextInput| ✅ | 82% | 
> | 1 | ScrollView| ✅ | 86% | 
> | 1 | Modal| 🟥 | 0% | 
> | 2 | ActivityIndicator| ✅ | 89% | 
> | 2 | Switch| ✅ | 92% | 
> | 2 | RefreshControl| 🟥 | 0% | 

Reviewer 3: Should we be sharing priority? Or just simplify to the props?
```suggestion
| Component | Available | Properties/Methods |
| --- | --- | --- | 
| View| ✅ | 93% | 
| Text| ✅ | 89% | 
| Image| ✅ | 91% | 
| TextInput| ✅ | 82% | 
| ScrollView| ✅ | 86% | 
| ActivityIndicator| ✅ | 89% | 
| Switch| ✅ | 92% | 
| RefreshControl| 🟥 | 0% | 
| Modal| 🟥 | 0% | 
```

> *As of April 2024*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of April 2024. More detail on the repo [here](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/issues/12042).
```
